Language diversity and the
three-language formula
Twenty-two languages are afforded official status
in India, referred to as ‘scheduled languages’ in
the Constitution. According to one source, these
constitute the ‘first’ spoken language of over 96 per
cent of the population. 86 However, estimates of the
total number of languages in India (depending on
how language–dialect divisions are drawn) have
varied from over 1,600 (based on the 1971 selfreported census data) 87 to less than 300, with
Ethnologue (in 2019) estimating 447 living languages.
To add to this diversity, there are 25 distinct writing
scripts used in India today, including variants on the
Northern Brahmic (e.g. Hindi) and Southern Brahmic
(e.g. Tamil) scripts. This creates a complex situation
for language in education policy, both in the
classroom and in the community, where language,
culture and ethnicity are inextricably linked.
Attempts to establish Hindi as the national language
in the 1960s were challenged – particularly in the
southern states – and today it is designated as a
co-official or ‘associate’ language along with English.
While Hindi operates as a lingua franca in the north
(where many languages are in the Indo-Aryan family
to which Hindi belongs), many from states in the
south of India (where languages are in the Dravidian
family) prefer to use English, not Hindi, as a lingua
franca within the country, and politicians from Tamil
Nadu in particular have consistently asserted its
right as a state to not mandate the teaching of Hindi
in its schools – including in response to the initial
draft of the new National Education Policy. 88
Both the Indian Constitution 89 and the Right to
Education Act assert that the medium of instruction
shall, as far as practicable, be the child’s mother
tongue. 90 However, it is only scheduled languages
which officially receive financial support from
central government towards their conservation and
it is therefore difficult for many groups to secure
adequate funding for schooling provision in minority
languages. As a result, one study found that
there were just 31 languages used as mediums
of instruction across the country in 2011. 91
In order both to recognise India’s linguistic diversity
and support the naturally multilingual practices of its
people, the government developed a three-language
formula (1968) for schools, which was implemented
in most states (except Tamil Nadu). This formula
envisaged that students should study three
languages, including two Indian languages and
English. In many non-Hindi-speaking states, the
two most commonly chosen Indian languages are
the state language and Hindi. The former of these
most often constitutes the medium of instruction
(MOI) for those classes that are not in an Englishmedium (EM) or Hindi-medium (HM) school or
‘section’ (some schools can have two sections
with different MOIs).
While this means that many learners gain initial
literacy in a language they know well (it may be
their parents’ language or the language of the
local community), others living in areas with higher
linguistic diversity may be forced to learn to read
and write in a language they do not know well, if at all
– a challenge that is known to hinder development of
initial literacy significantly. 92 In such situations, state
governments may attempt to provide early primary
education in a minority language, but often the lack
of textbooks and other materials, as well as a smaller
pool of qualified teachers who speak the language,
make this a logistical challenge. In Hindi-speaking
states, the third language chosen may be an ancient
language, such as Sanskrit, a second non-indigenous
language (e.g. Spanish or German) or another Indian
language. The Draft NEP (2019) continues to support
the three-language policy and advocates a stronger
focus on modern national languages – particularly
for majority-Hindi-speaking states 93 – although
wording in this particular section has been
contested and may lead to future revisions.
